# 1. Definition

## (a) The difference between baseband signals and passband signals

Baseband signals have narrow frequency range, while passband signals are signals that are modulated to occupy a higher frequency range.

## (b) What is a LOS link and a NLOS link

LOS stands for line of sight, and NLOS stands for non line of sight. A LOS link is a direct signal path, and there is no obstacle between the transmitter and the receiver. A NLOS link is an indirect signal path that the signal is reflected (or other interference by the obstacle) before reaching the receiver.

## (c) What is the multipath effect

Multipath effect happens when a signal is received by the receiver by two or more paths. This may cause phase shifting and interference that may cause the signal to become too weak.

## (d) What does a collision event mean? Why a collision event could still occur even if every device listens before talk?

A collision event happens when two or more signals are transmitted at the same time and interfere with each other.

A collision could still occur because of the propagation delay. Even if every device listens before talk, they may not receive the signal from the other device at the same time, and thus they may transmit at the same time. In this case, a collision event could still occur.

## (e) Wavelength of a 5GHz channel

The wave length of a signal is given by the formula:

$$
\lambda = \frac{c}{f}
$$

- $c$: speed of light ($3 \times 10^8 m/s$)
- $f$: frequency of the signal

For a 5GHz channel, the wavelength is:

$$
\lambda = \frac{3 \times 10^8}{5 \times 10^9} = 0.06 {\rm \ m} = 6 {\ \rm cm}
$$

## (f) What is channel state information (CSI)? What do $\alpha$ and $\phi$ mean?

Channel state information is the measured properties of a communication link.

- $\alpha$ is the amplitude of the channel.
- $\phi$ is the phase of the channel.

# 2. Medium access control

## (a) Probability that someone can transmit successfully in the second time slot

$$P = p_1(1 - p_2)(1 - p_3) + (1 - p_1)p_2(1 - p_3) + (1 - p_1)(1 - p_2)p_3$$

## (b) Probability that A can transmit successfully in the second time slot

$$P = p_1(1 - p_2)(1 - p_3)$$

## (c) Probability that the second time slot is idle

$$P = (1 - p_1)(1 - p_2)(1 - p_3)$$

## (d) The expected number of time slots for all nodes to transmit their packets

Assume that $p = p_1 = p_2 = p_3$.

$$E = 1 + \frac{1}{3p(1 - p)^2} + \frac{1}{2 p(1 - p)} + \frac{1}{p}$$

# 3. Path loss and capacity

## (a) Path loss of a 50m link on a 5GHz channel

$$
\begin{array}{l}
	\displaystyle
	\frac{P_r}{P_t} &=& 
	\displaystyle
	G_tG_r \left( \frac{\lambda}{4\pi d} \right)^2 \\
	&=& 
	\displaystyle
	1 \cdot 1 \cdot \left(
		\frac{
			\displaystyle
			\frac{c}{f}
		}{4 \pi \cdot 50}
	\right)^2 \\
	&=& 
	\displaystyle
	\left(
		\frac{
			\displaystyle
			\frac{3\cdot 10^8}{5 \cdot 10^9}
		}{200\pi}
	\right)^2 \\
	&=& 9.1189 \cdot 10^{-9}
\end{array}
$$